---
layout: default
author: Fulton Byrne
title: Leet Code 380 Insert Delete GetRandom O(1)
tags:
    - leetcode
---

This problem falls into a category I would label as "data structure composition". I identify these problems using the following traits:

1. The problem asks to _design_ a new datastructure
2. The problem defines runtime complexities that are not acheivable with just one datastrucrture.
    1. Many structures with `O(1)` insert and delete, but none with an accompanying `O(1)` random access.

## Try a Map

Using a `map[int]struct{}` is a great first move because, `map[int]struct{}` can do `O(1)` inserts and deletes with a "existence check" which is required by the constraints:

```go

things := map[int]struct{}

if _, ok := things[1]; ok {
    //exists
}

//doesn't exist
```

removing an element is also `O(1)`:
```go
delete(things, 1)
```

The problem becomes though, that in order to `GetRandom` we need a list of all the `map[int]struct{}` keys. This would mean `O(N)` key iteration every time. What we need is some `slice` structure that we can use `rand.RandIntn` with to access a random index in the range of the `slice`'s indices...

---

## Try a Stack

Since we need `O(1)` insert and remove, a stack or queue would be appealing. I prefer a stack because the interface has no more and no less than what I need: I just need to add and remove. A queue would be the wrong choice because queue's main benefit is processing in order which is not needed and adds implementation complexity.


A stack provides simple insert and remove, but one constraint is missing: whenever an insert or remove is performed we need to return an existence check. This means every `insert/delete` also includes a `find`.

Performing stack operations in Go should be done using slices:

`push`:
```go
stack = append(stack, 1)
```

`pop`:
```go
//creates a new slice [0,n-1)
stack = stack[:len(stack)-1]
```

So now we know that a `map` is inadequate, and a `stack` is inadequate, but together they could complete each other.

---

## Try a Stack and a Map

The `map` is very good at telling us _if_ something exists, and we could also use the map to tell us _where_ something exists in the `stack`.

So we'll delegate *existence* checks to the `map`.

Then that leaves the `stack` in charge of `GetRandom` calls.

* ✅ `insert` 
    * check the map for existence
    * `push` stack if does not exist
    * add an index entry in `map` for `len(stack) - 1`
* ✅ `getRandom`
    * `randIdx := rand.RandIntn(len(stack))` 
    * return `stack[randIdx]`
* ❌ `remove`
    * `pop` removes last element in stack, but _not_ a random element in the stack.
    * iterating over the stack would be `O(N)` and removing from interior would require shifting.
    * `map` is OK in this situation.

---

## Fixing `remove`

If we _know_ where items are by using the `map`, we can find the element to remove in `O(1)`, swap the element
with the element at the top of the stack, and _then_ `pop`.

I had to look at someone else's answer because my logic kept on being wrong, and to be honest if someone nitpicked me on swap correctness during an interview I might cry. This is an area of major improvement for me.



```go
//if it doesn't exist, leave
if _, ok := this.indices[val]; !ok {
    return false
}
idx := this.indices[val] // get the index for val
n := len(this.stack) // get the length of the stack
targetVal := this.stack[n-1] // get the value at the top of the stack (peek)

//we now move the top of the stack.
this.indices[targetVal] = idx // change top of stack location in map to removed index.
this.stack[idx], this.stack[n-1] = this.stack[n-1], this.stack[idx] // swap values, could just move one.

//cleanup
delete(this.indices, val) //delete from index map
this.stack = this.stack[:n-1] //pop stack
return true
```

So now my process when doing swaps will look something like this:

1. Setup indices and values to swap.
2. Perform the swap.
3. Cleanup if necessary.


---

## Conclusion

That's an example of data structure composition and an example for how one might reason through the problem.

Here are a list of other resources I referenced when solving this problem:

1. [Memory allocation of `map[int]interface{}` vs `map[int]struct{}`](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/65258003/memory-allocation-of-mapintinterface-vs-mapintstruct)
2. [Golang Reference: Deletion of map elements](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Deletion_of_map_elements)
3. [Golang Reference: Slice expressions](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Slice_expressions)